---
layout: post
title: Teensy Pass 2 design phase
---

So awhile back I started a python project on [github](https://github.com/TeensyPass/teensycli) (called TeensyPass) to play around with argparse and port my favorite password manager ([password-store](http://www.zx2c4.com/projects/password-store/)) to a more testable. The project allowed me to play with tools like [travis ci](travis-ci.org ) as well as some python packaging infrastructure.

That said, I've decided to port the project to haskell[^1]. As such I think now is a good time to reiterate some feature I think are in a good password manager (i.e. why I don't use some of the more fancy alternatives out there).

## Design Goals ##

1. K.I.S.S. [^2]: I don't want every feature imaginable...what I want is for it to work and work well....

2. Portable/human readable format : should be readable (somehow) even without the program [^3]

3. Easy to test/prove correctness : This includes auditing the source code (so no proprietary code)

4. Easy to use CLI : So that probably means autocomplete...plus then its easy to script!

5. Version control and sync : I want to be able to roll back and backup!

## Issues with current Software ##
This list is by no means complete. There is a surplus of password management software available and so I suspect at least one currently exists that meets my criteria (spoiler there's something very close in this list).

- Lastpass : I used last pass for about 2 years and loved it...that said as you can see it wasn't a perfect fit.
  - Proprietary
  - Opaque format (although it does export which earns it a)
  
- Keepass : Keepass is another one tool I used for awhile. While its ubiquity was nice and even had a command line interface, it seems to suffer from feature bloat
  - Opaque format
  - Complicated structure

- password-store : My current gold standard, my second brain
  - Because its a script, it tends to be hard to test its correctness...and looks like its held together by gum

- [pwsafe](https://github.com/sol/pwsafe) : I haskell based utility I found on github, seems like there's a few other utilities with the same though...
  - Almost exactly what I want...my only fear is that the code may try to do too much
  - I also (perhaps due to habit?) prefer the password-store command line interface
  - The CLI parsing code is  utilizes GetOpt which works but is abit fragile
  - The license is abit odd, its custom, but its still open source which is nice

## Development Plan ##

Given how close pwsafe to my idea password manager, I announce the following development plan:

1. Separate into project into 2 projects: CLI and back-end

2. Write (in haskell) a command line parser to emulate password-store
  - So far it looks like optparse-applicative is the best way to do this.

3. Explore adapting pwsafe for this new front-end or write small wrapper library

## Parser Design ##

Here's the pass help output

```
Usage:
    pass init [--reencrypt,-e] gpg-id
        Initialize new password storage and use gpg-id for encryption.
        Optionally reencrypt existing passwords using new gpg-id.
    pass [ls] [subfolder]
        List passwords.
    pass [show] [--clip,-c] pass-name
        Show existing password and optionally put it on the clipboard.
        If put on the clipboard, it will be cleared in 45 seconds.
    pass insert [--echo,-e | --multiline,-m] [--force,-f] pass-name
        Insert new password. Optionally, the console can be enabled echo
        the password back. Or, optionally, it may be multiline. Prompt
        before overwriting existing password unless forced.
    pass edit pass-name
        Insert a new password or edit an existing password using emacsclient -c.
    pass generate [--no-symbols,-n] [--clip,-c] [--force,-f] pass-name pass-length
        Generate a new password of pass-length with optionally no symbols.
        Optionally put it on the clipboard and clear board after 45 seconds.
        Prompt before overwriting existing password unless forced.
  n  pass rm [--recursive,-r] [--force,-f] pass-name
        Remove existing password or directory, optionally forcefully.
    pass git git-command-args...
        If the password store is a git repository, execute a git command
        specified by git-command-args.
    pass help
        Show this text.
    pass version
        Show version information.

More information may be found in the pass(1) man page.
```

As you can see, pass first selects which type of command it is followed by actually having option parsing. From my experience, this is easiest done by dispatching to a separate parser based on the argument. From my first overview of the optparse-applicative this seems to be more than doable.

One nice feature of exactly replicating the pass CLI (aside from my familiarity with it) is reusing all the zsh, bash scripts and auto-complete plugins developed for it.

Lastly, I tentatively plan to call the binary tpass and potentially symlink pass -> tpass once I feel the project is stable enough. If you have any opinions on the matter, feel free to tweet me at @mvcisback

[^1]: My new favorite language as it were

[^2]: Keep it simple stupid

[^3]: For example if its based on JSON + RSA... 
